.. _CNWS:


#####
CN-WS
#####

CN-WS was developed in 2016 by KU Leuven (in a consortium with Antea group Belgium,
see Antea, 2016).
This model was made to simulate the sediment transport to watercourses and to
evaluate the effects of erosion control measures, both in space and time, based
on time series of rainfall events. The model combines two existing models:
WaTEM/SEDEM and the Curve Number model. See the section on the
:ref:`history <history>` for more information about the development history.

Description of the CN-WS model
==============================

As stated above, two models are combined to simulate sediment transport to a
river during a rainfall event: the Curve Number model and WaTEM/SEDEM.

The CN model is used to simulate the run-off as a function of time and space. 
For every outlet or (optionally) river segment a hydrogram (stream velocity as a
function of time) is generated.

WaTEM/SEDEM is used to model the total sediment load leaving the model domain
via rivers or an outlet. The use of WaTEM/SEDEM in CN requires to precompute
and R-factor and provide it as model input. In order to compute an R-factor
value, the `R-factor python packge <https://cn-ws.github.io/rfactor/>`_) can
be used.

The output of both models is combined: the total sediment load is distributed
over the hydrogram to obtain a sedigram (sediment concentration and sediment
load as a function of time). The sediment concentration :math:`SC` is
calculated for every timestep as:

.. math::
    SC = \frac{(SV_{event}*1000)}{RO_{event}*1000}

With:

- :math:`SC`, the sediment concentration for an event (:math:`g.l^{-1}`).
- :math:`SV_{event}`, the total sedimentload for one event (:math:`kg`).
- :math:`RO_{event}`, the total run-off volume for one event (:math:`m^{3}`).

Do note that the sedigram is constant over an event, but not over a
timeseries. The sediment load and flow are integrated over time for a single event,
leading to two constants per event. A timeseries is generated by considering different
events (see also `R-factor python packge <https://cn-ws.github.io/rfactor/>`_).

Additional model features
=========================

Some additional functionalities were added to CN-WS, next to the basic model
features of WaTEM/SEDEM and the CN model. These additional functionalities have
a large impact on water and sediment transport through the model domain. By
default, these additional features are disabled, but can be enabled in the
ini-file with the correct user choice. When the user enables an extra feature,
the model will expect more user input (rasters and variables).

.. _bufferbasins:

Buffer basins
*************

Buffer basins have a large impact on the dynamics of water and sediment run-off
in the landscape. These constructions are temporary storages of water and
sediment traps. The delayed water run-off and sediment deposition
is included in the model.

In the WaTEM/SEDEM part of CN-WS, all sediment entering the pixels of a buffer
is multiplied with the sediment trapping efficiency of the buffer. This trapping
efficiency is the fraction of the incoming sediment that is trapped in the
buffer basin.

The delayed water run-off is based on the report of Meert and Willems (2013) and
uses following principles in the CN-model in CN-WS:

Water will only flow out of a buffer basin when the water height in the basin
exceeds the height of discharge pipe of the buffer. Therefore, the dead
volume, :math:`V_{dead}`, is calculated by

.. math::
    V_{dead} = (\frac{H_{opening}}{H_{dam}}){V_{basin}}


Where:

- :math:`H_{opening}` is the height of the opening of the discharge pipe of the
  buffer basin :math:`(m)`
- :math:`H_{dam}` is the height of the dam of the buffer basin :math:`(m)`
- :math:`V_{basin}` is the maximum volume of water that can be trapped in the
  buffer basin (:math:`m^{3}`).

Two cases exist. A first case can be defined as when the water volume in the
buffer basin is larger than :math:`V_{dead}`, but smaller than :math:`V_{basin}`,
the water will flow through the discharge pipe according to

.. math::
    R(t) = (Q_{max}.\sqrt{\frac{V(t)}{V_{basin} - V_{dead}}}).dt

where:

- :math:`R(t)`: the amount of run-off during timestep t (:math:`m^{3}`)
- :math:`Q_{max}`: the maximum discharge (:math:`m^{3} s^{-1}`)
- :math:`V(t)`: the volume of water present in the buffer basin at timestep t
  (:math:`m^{3}`)
- :math:`dt`: the timestep :math:`(s)`

:math:`Q_{max}` is calculated for every buffer basin according to

.. math::
    Q_{max} = C_d.A_0.\sqrt{2.g.(H_{dam} - H_{opening})}

Where :

- :math:`C_d` is the discharge coefficient :math:`(-)`,
- :math:`A_0` is the area of the discharge opening (:math:`m^{2}`)
- :math:`g` is the gravitational acceleration (9.81 :math:`m.s^{-2}`)

A second case arises when the water volume in the buffer basin is larger than
:math:`V_{basin}`. In this case the water will flow from the basin through the discharge pipe
:math:`R_{opening}`, as well as, via the overflow of the dam :math:`R_{overflow}`.

.. math::
    R = R_{opening} + R_{overflow}

    R_{opening} = Q_{max}.dt

    R_{overflow} = C_d.W_{dam}.\sqrt{g}.h(t)^{3/2}.dt

Where:

- :math:`W_{dam}` is the width of the overflow on the buffer basin dam :math:`(m)`
- :math:`h` is the height of the water above the overflow :math:`(m)` and is calculated
  for every timestep by:

.. math::
    h(t) = \frac{V(t) - V_{basin}}{A_{basin}}

Where :math:`A_{basin}` represents the area of the buffer basin in :math:`m^{2}`

The practical use of buffer basins in the model is described
:ref:`in a separate section <includebuffers>`.

Dams and ditches
****************

Dams and ditches influence the direction of water and sediment transport and,
thus, alter the routing. The routing along a dam or ditch is incorporated in the
routing algorithm. A detailed explanation about these functionalities is given
in the user choices sections about :ref:`ditches <includeditches>` and
:ref:`dams <includedams>`.

.. _sewers:

Sewers/endpoints
****************

Sewers, or more generally, endpoints, are sinks of sediment in the model domain. 
When sediment is routed to an endpoint, only a fraction of it is transported 
further downstream. A detailed explanation about this functionality is given in the 
user choices section about :ref:`sewers <inlcudesewers>`. This feature can be
used to incorporate known sediment sinks in the model. 

References
==========

Antea, 2016. Modellering van de sedimentaanvoer naar de waterlopen, het
effect van erosiebestrijdingsmaatregelen en het transport van sediment in de
onbevaarbare waterlopen. Departement Omgeving. Afdeling Gebiedsontwikkeling,
Omgevingsplannen en -projecten. Land en Bodembescherming, Brussel.
https://www.vlaanderen.be/publicaties/modellering-van-de-sedimentaanvoer-naar-de-waterlopen-het-effect-van-erosiebestrijdingsmaatregelen-en-het-transport-van-sediment-in-de-onbevaarbare-waterlopen

Van Oost, K., Govers, G. & Desmet, P.J.J., 2000, Evaluating the effects of
changes in the landscape structure on soil erosion by water and tillage.
Landscape Ecology 15, 577-589. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008198215674

Van Rompaey, A., Verstraeten, G., Van Oost, K. Govers, G. & Poesen, J., 2001,
Modelling mean annual sediment yield using a distributed approach. Earth
Surface Processes and Landforms 26(11), 1221-1236. https://doi.org/10.1002/esp.275

Verstraeten, G., Van Oost, K., Van Rompaey, A., Poesen, J. & Govers, G., 2003,
Evaluating an integrated approach to catchment management to reduce soil loss
and sediment pollution through modelling. Soil Use and Management, 18, 386-394.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-2743.2002.tb00257.x

Verstraeten, G., Poesen, J., Demarée, G., Salles, C, 2006, Long-term (105
years) variability in rain erosivity as derived from 10-min rainfall depth
data for Ukkel (Brussels, Belgium): Implications for assessing soil erosion
rates. Journal of geophysical research, 111. https://doi.org/10.1029/2006JD007169
